---
created: 2026-05-08 10:40
type:
domain:
action:
links:
tags:
custom-width: 100
---
I have to unpack my personal position regarding AI- actually, it's not just AI, it's more about, It's form-finding, it's a commentary on our current paradigm. And I think first I have to sort of understand explicitly what our social, political, and environmental condition is. And what exactly my interpretation is, in a descriptive way, of our current paradigm in the architectural profession. And, I mean, you know, I think a lot of people think AI is taking over, but the reality is that AI doesn't have the ability to fully think critically. It reflects its input. For the most part, and it's quite difficult to get an AI that formulates its own opinion. And I think the power of architecture is critical thinking and being opinionated and having a position. And that begins to show quite clearly when you get architects, there's a certain level of ego involved, you know? There's confidence and there's discretion. There's informed, educated discretion about, about the way the world should work. And I think it becomes easy to think that's replicable. But it's really, really not. 

So, let's unpack, I think, our social position. If I look at our social position, I mean, what is the current state of his? You know... Maybe, I think, social interactions... There's always individuals that don't quite know. 

Okay, so continuing to unpack the social position, I think a lot of the issues with architects and just people in general is that we've lost the ability to engage with confidence with each other, to listen with empathy, to put aside our differences, or rather acknowledge differences without, I think a lot of people kind of assume that things should function from their worldview. We're seeing an increase in polarising politics, and I think a lot of the, you know, our social condition as a result of the politics that surround us, you know, um, I think it's certainly, um, you know, it's certainly possible and certainly doable to be... 

I think it's becoming increasingly important to sort of...

Articulating our contemporary social condition. Our political condition and our environmental conditions. I think notably, you know, the ability to think critically is what defines us as architects. 
an education that's applicable to so many other professions, and the reason we have skills that are so widely applicable is because design thinking is a skill that makes us exceptionally valuable. Um... This is not just, you know, architecture glazing, but... there's a reason, I believe. Um, that AI can't replace architects, and rather, you know, I think when you use AI, AI becomes a marker of what you shouldn't do. 
As an architect, it's there to show you the collective bias of what the world represents, and, you know, AI itself is predominantly informed by the data of people that have access to it. And the people that have access to it are... The richer, class, the Western powers, it's formatted to better understand language, that is spoken, no, in English, ignoring sudden intelligences of other languages. 
In the South African context, that would be, like the indigenous languages that we understand, this subtext, this context, this, you know, there are connotations that AI will not understand, because there is no lived experience for it to bold upon. Um, it certainly has a very reductive understanding of... of stereotypes and tropes and very extreme positions with which it uses to apply itself. 
Again, the sense of criticality is missing, because, you know, a criticality, restraint, and discretion, and what make a good architect, because it's not about adopting something entirely or leaning fully into one extreme of polarity. But rather figuring out which aspects of it work in a context, in a situated context, I think also situated knowledge, and the comparison of lived experiences, and spatial memory is something that can't be replicated. 
It can hardly be replicated by people to each other, let alone an AI that has to translate its understandings of space and sound and visual information into its own language. And even in that, there is a loss of translation. It has to explain things to itself. They are, um, you know, their their marginal. There is a marginal room for error. That will improve, but never fully be without its own interpretation. And those decisions, uh, are based on its own understanding of the information. 
Um, Someone earlier, when you ask AI to summarise a chat. The key insights it delivers may exclude the use of particular semantics of evocative language of... direct quoted one liners that have more meaning in the particular phrasing than a summarised overall understanding of what that sentence means. 

Um... So I think, you know, I am largely responding to the use of AI, the role of the architect. These are, you know, the technological advances that are being made. 
What makes our profession relevant? 
Where is there room for growth? 
What is the future of the profession? 
You know, I have, I do have the position that architects cannot be replaced by AI. Um... But there is a large amount of, you know, 

I think I have a strong position on data ownership on the fact that individuals need to scale up in the technical realm, to be able to converse in this language. It is a language, and it's a tool, and the better, the more you use it, the better it becomes available to you. Having the ability to manipulate data information in the most efficient and representative way is also a skill that architects, I think, have the capacity for, but we're not sort of explicitly trained for anymore. 

In terms of, you know, contemporary, social, political, and environmental concerns... 
Socially, I think I am socially driven. as a person, and I think identity is at the root of social and political directions at the moment. And identity is what differentiates us from... the norm. There is a loss of identity, or there is an isolation. There are these, there's a loss of community as well. Um, due to algorithmic control. 
People don't know what their own interests identity is being dictated to us instead of intuitively understood. 
People are overstimulated, attention, deficits. 
Um, people on a spectrum, and people that are neurodiverse, are not sort of recognised as being valid, because it's seen as, uh, coming of the time. You know, I'm autistic because of my phone, not true. 

Environmentally, I mean, of course, there's climate change. 
There's economic disparity, a lot of our, a lot of our environmental decisions are economically, economically important. You know, and and there's also about how to, how does one craft opportunity for themselves? Can I work alone? Do I need to work with people? Do I work in a public space? Do I have opportunity to work? in a public space that I can tolerate, um, you know, I think environment is largely dictated by budget. 
And in the larger scale, of course, you know, there's climate change, there's, there's politics, there's war, there's, there are a whole host of conspiracies that have now come to light. You know, that dictate our access to resources. 

In South Africa, especially, we are living in a very relatively free land, um, a very person, respecting constitution, with extremely fragile service delivery that makes it difficult sometimes to do even the basic, the basic tasks. So there's a very complex, um... 

You know, there's also this notion of exponential growth. There's this idea that things, progress, developments, are accelerating so far beyond our reach and control. The human species, uh, canonically, has evolved in the past 100 years, more than, I need to find the percentage on this, but, like, really worked so rapidly that we discovered electricity, like, just over 100 years ago. And look at how it's now the foundation of our society. 

Um, you know, there's, I think there's a whole host of also ancient wisdom that, um, that baffles us, that is not replicable. And there is a sense of connection, connection to each other, connection to the environment, connection to, if you believe, in a higher power, but overall, the collective consciousness of humanity that is lost. There's an affective dimension that, that is, that is being, that is lost. There's a disruption, disillusionment, with reality and the way it functions, the systems in which we operate, are not designed for the user. 

And, um, I think, you know, the role of the architect becomes that of systems thinker. We... have a personal position that information is power, and now it becomes more important than ever to govern what information is out there, how you control your information, how it's structured, what access you have to it. 
Something as simple as note taking. How does that guide you? How does that work with you? And then, um, you know, I can talk about personal knowledge management for like ever and ever. 
But, You know, what does it, what are the implications you have for form finding strategies? Ultimately? I think that's... what, um, we need to understand. 

And I think more and more is this idea that people are losing touch with the ability to draw, to visualise the ideas without having something else do it for you. 
And I think, again, I'm coming back to the position that AI was there to receive things in a container and then show you almost what not to do. It's there to show you what you don't want. 

So for me, being an autistic ADHD individual, I think the way that I have craft developed systems, the way that I think of and conceive architecture. Um, is a very eclectic put together process that I find it hard to support with existing softwares, with, um... with, you know, with the inability to fully order and organise my own thoughts. 
But, you know, AI may become a dialogical partner to me, and I use that in my day to day living. I certainly don't listen to it as if it is an instructor. It never gets things the way that I want it. And so it's there for me to view the benchmark of what the world views as sameness. You know, it is there to represent a bias, a collective bias of what is normative, of what... Of what doesn't essentially represent me, and then I have to ask myself, what would I do differently? And it is in that difference that that form is found. 
Um, when I ask AI to generate images of my thesis, it's so far from what I'm expecting. And I think there's value in using the tools that are exposed at our disposal to develop a baseline of what we don't want. Um... To... to clarify intentions. 
You know, I use AI as a dialogue partner, to point out the flaws in my argument, because if it doesn't understand something, or if it's feeding me back information, that don't accurately represent what I am putting out, or what I'm intending to do, that it means it is an issue with my initial argument. That can be misinterpreted. So I argue that often. Um... I point out it's flaws. 

I think, you know, if I look at form finding strategies, I think I need to break that down. What is form, what is form finding, and what is a form finding strategy to begin with? Like, how, you know, how, how will... 
What is the role of the architect? 
What is, how are these social political environmental conditions affecting bomb binding strategies? This isn't just about AI, you know? Um, I'm trying here to develop a position. How do I find form? 

The truth is, I myself still do not know my design process. And I think, um, you know, the development of form is essentially the design process. It's, it's, um, I think it's, you know, throughout society, we have, we've understood many movements. There's form follows function, and there's function follows form. And I have a position, which is the form follows feeling. I think that's where we're headed. 
Um, I think we are moving closer and closer to developing spaces that respond to the way people feel. Um, you know, this could be smart buildings. 
I don't know how I feel about that, but responsive buildings. I also don't know how I feel about that. 
I think one of the core values moving forward is privacy and ownership, an agency, and user respecting spaces, strategies, information management. I think all of that is relevant. 

Um, there's also, like, you know, if you if you think about the physical space that things occupy, like a server, AI servants, just servers in general across the globe. It does lead you to wonder, you know, like, someone else is effectively owning my my shit, and and I don't own my own data. I think people, you know, there's still this fear and ignorance surrounding the way technology works. The more we learn about it, the more ownership we take. Um, the more we change, and I think, 

I'm someone that I've always wanted to be a digital nomad. Ive had this fantasy my whole life of being able to pack up the essentials and, you know, navigate to different parts of the globe. There's this idea, you know, if everyone wants to travel, everyone wants to find, you know, there's, there's, there's migration movements, um... That evolved with the times. I think the places that a person aspires to visit, to live in, the cultures they wish to assimilate with, that represents a mode of thinking. You know, there's a lot to be said about someone that is born in one place. Idolises another place, another culture, and assimilates eventually better with a different culture, for what reasons? What do they prefer? What do they not prefer? And then, what are the implications then for how they operate, how they live in space? They're living arrangements, they're working arrangements, and what must then become of architecture to support that. Um.. Yeah, there's a whole lodge. 

Like, you know, describing the current condition is, is an interesting set of ideals. Um, an interesting set of thoughts, and I've allowed myself to wonder through those thoughts, but at the end of it, I've come to a... a position, you know? 

And also, you know, about using the tools at your disposal. Like, I personally won't use ChatGPT because of Sam Altman funding, um, Israel. selling data to the US military. In my politics here, I'm going to start to dictate what AI tools I use. And also, which AI tools I'm gonna choose AI tools that are best suited for the tasks that I believe they're good at. 

Ethics, ethics, from a political standpoint, are gonna become increasingly important. 
The software, software monopolies, hell, I'm a rhino. I'm a rhino fan because there's so much customisation and empowerment to the user. Um, compared to something like Autodesk that is essentially imposing a monopoly on the entire architectural profession. One has to consider, you know, the big guy and the small guy, and I think we're getting to a point in society where people are growing increasingly frustrated with what dictates the standard of how we do things. 

And why does brand, why does Monopoly? Why does industry, um, start to dictate the way that we live in a number of conspiracies that exasperate us, that we can't escape. Um, right down to food. Can you source food that is healthy and non-processed? Where do you find it? And the state of the world is frustrating to many individuals. 

And I think... I think as architects, you know, if you look at the anarchist's cookbook, about rebuilding society from scratch. These are skills that the architect has. I think the role of the architect now becomes, how do I use all these various susami knives type skills at my disposal to create a stream of income, but it's not manipulative. 

So many people... We just think about the nature of how money works as well, the capitalistic nature of society. I'm not saying we should be socialists. I'm not saying we should be communists either. Um... But there is an element of ethicality and unfairness that is missing, and I think the solution is equity. You know, there's parity power in purchases. There's passive income, there's exchanging of knowledge that is respectable and real and deconstructed, decentralised, you know, community led, bartering, um... You know, like, there's abundance in trading and sharing skills. 

And I think on some level, you know, architects have the responsibility and the ability in the 1st place to guide society back to its roots and imply certain things about the way society should function. Because, you know... There's a lot that this could mean for form finding. 

This is a very long position, but the state of the world, state of economic, state of social relations and politics. But I think what this means is that form binding has to be eclectic. It has to be specific. It has to be contextualised. These are rules that are taught to us. 
And I think also, there needs to be a certain level of detachment from form finding as well. 
Sometimes I put something here because I just fucking like it. 
And there's an there needs to be an understanding that the uses of that space will dictate how it works. There is, there is no such thing as a building functioning, the way the architect intended, because there's too much that we don't know. And trying to know everything is the first step towards failure. I mean, look at Alvaro Siza, and that building in Berlin, La Tristesse, was graffitied onto it, and he initially wanted it removed, and there it stays, because it is an important character of the building. Um... You know, our personal individualistic positions may stand for something, and that brings value into the forms that we create for sure. And then it becomes a dialogue. And it becomes our role to sit back and watch that dialogue happen and facilitate that dialogue moving forward. How can architecture be responsive? How can it be moved, manipulated, catered to for a specific community? 

And then, there's also the more, um, the digital, the virtual realm of architecture, you know, like if... How do we, as a profession, begin to take ownership of the way that we work? The process of developing is just as important as the outcome. Um, and I think there's a lot that architects now, that, you know, the health of architects, the way that we work, the mentality, the way that we manage information, the way practises are managed, it's so messy sometimes, and it's so rigid. And in those that do function, it'll function according to a very particular system. There's no room for flexibility. no room for growth. There's no true mentorship or apprenticeship. There's no experience led education on... And I think, also, like, as an architect, I think we need to see, um... you know, an increase in possibly specialisations or... You know, what feels influence us in the way that we develop forms? What other bodies of knowledge do we truly need to study and learn? Maybe, maybe, being an architect, uh... Maybe it's something that needs to be redefined. Really looked at. 

The fact that so many professions borrow the word architect from us, particular in IT, um, is really frustrating. And it brings into question, like, why am I not eligible for those roles? Why can't I apply for a software architect job? Because what are you using the word architect for? And what are those implications? And if I am an architect by nature, why am I not eligible for it? Because it's a way of thinking. way of constructing systems, a way of managing and ordering the world. 

And if I have to consider the position of AI in one of those, um, it's that AI is, is about information. It's not a creative tool. And you know, I need to do a bit of a deep dive here on how machine learning actually functions, how something is trained. I have trained a model before. like image detection. I think the only true value of an AI model is when you train it to yourself. And when it's something that you are building from scratch, for it to think like you, for it to make decisions similarly to you, and knowing that a model is trained for a specific reason, we are exposed to large language models that have very broad applications without truly understanding the mechanics of how each function is executed. 

And... If you think of design as a set of these mechanics, you know, I think firstly, there needs to be an understanding of how each individual designs something, what their process is, and then, um, integrating a specific set of tools that matches that workflow. And then letting form develop. 

You know, there's also, if you consider form finding also, there's a skill issue. You know, sometimes, sometimes, you have an idea and you just don't have the right tools to make that a physical reality. And for someone like me who has aphasia, or aphantasia, I can't visualise. Um, it becomes, it becomes a bit difficult for finding. You know? Um, I can hardly ever see in my mind's eye what something is going to look like. But I can sort of model things based off of my interior spatial intelligence. My bodily intelligence. In my case, I have a kinaesthetic sensory understanding of spaces of how something felt in that moment. And then I tried to replicate that with, you know, crafting a vibe. 

Um, I think, no one makes that special is that people, people will ultimately guide the way that we find form. 

The more something becomes normalised, the more individuals become outliers to that norm. I need to bring in a citation here from outliers, the book. But the fact is that people that are outliers to the norm have revolutionary ways of transforming that process or that outcome. And at the moment I do sit on an upward trend of people that sort of think similarly to me, my generation tends to share similar thoughts about what we're trying to achieve. We have similar, we have a limited shared theory of mind, but there's a lot that still isn't understood. And often, you know, that shared theory of mind, allows you to connect with certain communities, and those communities are almost always a reflection of a subset of your values, or demographics. Maybe you will connect with somebody that, that, that, that, that shares the same race as you, but of the same gender, the same gender, but not the same race. And you will have shared theories of mind to a certain extent with all of them. I do think that is how universality is formed. Something can be evocative in that sense, because there is a shared theory of mind that must exist across multiple cultures, multiple demographics, and there's also not only one singular expression of something, but rather that you will have multiple iterations of forms of spaces, of sensory experiences, that others will have responses to, some of those responses may be similar to yours, others may differ. Um... I wonder if there is any relevance here to my thesis argument, and Death As Dreamscape, what is a Dreamscape? 

There does seem to be this collective longing in our society for something. And I think Dreamscapes start to touch on that argument. I think my thesis position is part of my personal position as well. Um... And, something like, there is something classic and timeless about, about certain elements of, for example, critical regionalism. How is it that after so many years from across history and time and differing demographics, language barriers, just someone that is so culturally, historically different from me, can design a building that speaks to me, that evokes a certain emotional experience? What has been lost? What has changed? And what, I do think, you know, as a society, we sort of navigate certain cycles. We do collectively return and reflect and relive certain strands of history that repeat itself. So I think it's always hard to identify the movement that you're in whilst you're in it. And that's why trend forecasters are amazing about what they do. 

Within the architectural profession, what does this mean now, considering, what movement are we in? What are we revisiting? And how old is position evolved moving forward? It's easy to think that you're in the middle, only for you to discover later on in life that you were actually, you know, towards one of the polarities. I think it's much easier when you have some sense of awareness of where your polarity is and what your politics are. No one is ever truly of central. No one is ever also truly a contrarian. You know, doing something that is opposing to the norm, for the sake of being opposing to the norm, you're a conformist of a different nature. Um, I'm sure contrarian is, is, uh, able to think critically about when or when not to follow and when to eat. And I think, again, these are mentalities that architecture grooms us to have. And these modalities become the way that we think about the world. 

We will often be misunderstood. We will often be difficult to communicate with. It brings into, you know, the question of intelligence, you know, is intelligence someone that sounds so unrelatable, but so impressive, or someone that is relatable and able to make a very hard concept easily understood to someone. whilst respecting their intelligence, being of a different nature to you. 

So there are a lot of thoughts to have here. I have thought rather freely and openly for the past 33, 34 minutes. But essentially, I will now explore, you know, what my beliefs are, and, and I will have to unpack all of this and delineate it into what does it mean in the realm of architectural form finding? Architectural, aesthetic, architectural design, architectural development, design, development, and processes, construction methods, and materials. The way that we think, the way that we design, the outputs that we are expected to deliver, who we, who answers to that, you know? Is the client always king?